# Client Controlled Nullability WG - August 2023

**Watch the replay:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCERcwLeheOXp_u61jEXxHMA/videos)

Attendees:

- Martin Bonnin
- Stephen Spalding
- Young Min Kim
- Benoit Lubek
- Benjie
- Matt
- Alex

Notes:

- Discussion from GraphQL WG:
  [notes](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/notes/2023/2023-08.md#ccn),
  [video](https://youtu.be/SnEdDStUugA?t=1075)
- Proposed Agenda:
  [https://github.com/calvincestari/client-controlled-nullability-wg/pull/1/files](https://github.com/calvincestari/client-controlled-nullability-wg/pull/1/files)
- Introduction done
- Stephen: Proceed with only (!)? From 8/3 WG, do we have resolution? There was
  discussion about whether (?) is essential
- Benjie: The group present 8/3 was largely the same as CCN subgroup. Hoping to
  bring it back to WG for a wider audience
- Benjie: This impacts fragment modularity
- Young: If we introduce without (?) that will impact the meaning of (!)
- Benjie: Any queries that have only (!) would need to continue working, even if
  (?) was added later
- Benjie: We were missing proponents of (?) at the last meeting (i.e. Lee). We
  should be feedback before proceeding
- Stephen: If we decide that (?) is essential, do we include it with the
  currently proposed propagation behavior, or with simpler semantics where it
  only flips the nullability of a field and normal GraphQL bubbling behavior is
  preserved
- Young: I am in favor of the simpler definition of (?)
- Matt: bubbling in GraphQL probably should have been done differently. It
  basically makes it dangerous to use NonNull in a schema. CCN shouldn’t be
  necessary. One of the lessons we’re learning from Relay is that @required is
  usually use in places where the function the resolver is calling actually
  returns a non-null value but the server makes it null just because we don’t
  want the bubbling behavior
- Stephen: Consider a (?) addition for the schema SDL. This would be a way for
  the server to express that this field is semantically nullable. i.e. Null is
  an expected state. This would mean that the default is for fields to be only
  null if something goes wrong.
- Matt:
- Benije: In GraphQL, the client can dictate the response shape. One
  interpretation of CCN is allowing the client to control the response shape
  more - by stating that a certain field cannot (or can) be null. Or by stating
  that it can or cannot be omitted,
  - Matt points out that when a null bubbles, the response cannot be written
    safely to normalized store. `?` could indicate that omitting that field
    would be safe, and thus the error should be marked as "safe" for normalized
    store, e.g. by going into "ccnErrors" or having an extra property. `?` would
    act a little like `@skip(if: $var)` in that respect, except we don't know
    the value of `$var` at runtime.
  - "Omitting" doesn't make sense for list items? So `?` and `!` only - no
    `[[!]!]!` syntax?
  - One reason for giving clients this control is the schema should be "correct"
    (this thing _can_ be null) but _lazy_ clients should be able to state "I
    can't be bothered to handle this right now - if this comes through as null
    then bubble it up". This may be useful when there are multiple clients to
    the same API - e.g. a fully featured web client and a quick and dirty mobile
    client.
- Martin: As an Android developer using Kotlin, I want to be able to have
  codegen take nullability into account so that I don’t need to handle null case
  unnecessarily
- Matt: in the mobile clients I work on, we still handle requests from 2 years
  ago. If a field can _ever_ be null, it needs to be nullable _now_ otherwise
  we're messing up a client. Without null bubbling, nullable -> non-nullable
  requires client to check in errors array on a null "because that can't
  happen". (Re: Codegen.) Old clients dictating what the schema ought to be is
  kind of funky.
- Matt: two classes of error: 1) throw away response, or 2) field shouldn't be
  null but whatever.
- Martin: CCN is about who we're optimizing for, currently we're optimizing for
  what Benjie calls "fully featured web app", but I'd love this proposal to
  invert this so that you can do something what Benjie calls "quick and dirty"
  fast in your quick mobile app, and improve later. This can help developers
  onboard to GraphQL as they don't need to worry about these concerns until a
  few months into their journey. Feels like `?` is the beginning of an answer
  for this.
- Benjie: I'd be interested in exploring what `?` would mean if it were _only_
  on a named fragment definition, and not allowed on fields. I imagine it could
  catch errors and (as Matt suggests) omit the fields that were _solely_ in the
  fragment (and don't overlap with other selection sets)
- Benjie: If `?` meant "(make nullable and) omit on null/error", what would `!`
  mean - is it a simple `GraphQLNonNull` or something else?
  - Young: Maybe we don’t use (?) syntax for that
- Young: A benefit of directives is discoverability
- Matt: If we change propagation we need syntax. Directives can’t modify shape.
  - Benjie: what about skip/include?
  - Matt: It’s not beyond local area. Could be modeled with undefined. But a
    good point that we do sort of change the shape
- Benjie: `-` might make sense.
  - `{ id name -friends { … } }`
  - `{ id name friends @skip(on: [ERROR, NULL]) { … } }`
  - We already have the skip directive. We could add an `on` condition to it
  - Matt: Slightly cleaner directives would be `@errorOnNull` (for what we’re
    talking about for ! On nullable fields) and `@skipOnError` (for ? On
    non-nullable fields) Which you can still compose (@errorOnNull @skipOnError)
- Stephen: Conclusions?
  - Young: We’re in alignment (!) only flips nullability and doesn’t change
    propagation
- Alex: Can we run multiple ones without committing yet?
- Benjie: The thing with (!) is that it can be done entirely on the client side.
- Matt: Reminds me of Rust language proposals. The first thing is “what is the
  behavior?”. Provide the ability to do the behavior and then if there’s better
  syntax it’s just a code mod.
  - Directive first. Once its clear that this is that it should mean
- Benjie: Hard to express lists with a directive
- Stephen: Can this just be an initial limitation that you can’t express fine
  grained nullability within lists using CCN?
- Alex: Directive was brought up at the first meeting, we turned this down for
  some reason.
  - Matt: I recall that Lee doesn’t like for directive to change the shape of
    response
  - [Lee’s response to directives](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/5ded76fc7a7b2d1a415fe61e71cd91f404258af8/notes/2021/2021-05-13.md?plain=1#L127):
    “I'm in strong support for syntax rather than directive for this. Directives
    pollute a query, you may end up adding a lot more directive text than field
    text! `!` is a really natural syntax especially for Kotlin/Swift.”
- Benjie: propose that we bring the same discussion to WG and hope that we have
  some more representation. I’ll talk to Lee. Anyone else?
  - Matt: Jordan Eldrige
