# Client Controlled Nullability WG - January 2025

**Watch the replay:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HSbChLT9Itg)

## Attendees

- Alex
- Benjie

## Summary

Since there were only two people in attendance neither was able to take notes.
This summary was
[posted to Discord](https://discord.com/channels/625400653321076807/971515695881924621/1344403874923937836)
after the meeting:

Summary of the meeting:

- We don't think we'll be ready to make a decision by the end of the WG meeting.
  There's still a little more to discuss.
- Instead we're going to do a status update, and present Benji's tradeoffs
  document. I'll try and get a read of where the working group stands.
- I also want to get Lee's OK to eliminate solution 2.
- Benji is going to put together a spreadsheet so we can collectively weight the
  decision criteria. We're looking to completing that weighting process before
  the working group meeting on the 6th.
- I'm personally aiming for a decision by the end of the subsequent primary WG
  meeting
- We're putting implementation work on hold until the WG meeting. Generalizing
  the parse-phase document directive was going to be kind of a heavy lift, so
  I'd rather not do that work if we don't need to. We'll have more confidence to
  move forward with that or not after the WG meeting. The rest of the
  implementation is basically done though.
- Whichever solution we choose of 1-4, the impact on introspection is still not
  fully decided upon.
- Whichever solution we choose, the method of disabling null bubbling is not yet
  agreed upon, and may impact on the introspection portion of semantic
  nullability.
