# Meeting Summary for Client Controlled Nullability

**NOTICE**: This summary was auto-generated by Zoom's "AI". AI-generated
content may be inaccurate or misleading. Always check for accuracy. If in
doubt, please consult the meeting recording at
https://youtube.com/@GraphQLFoundation/playlists

- Meeting start: 2025-04-30T18:59:52Z
- Meeting end: 2025-04-30T20:03:50Z
- Summary start: 2025-04-30T19:00:19Z
- Summary end: 2025-04-30T20:03:48Z

The team discussed various proposals for GraphQL, with a focus on the potential impact on their internal systems at Meta and the need for a clear migration strategy. They also debated the use of new syntax for a transitional feature, the importance of considering legacy clients in their future plans, and strategies for the upcoming working group meeting. The team agreed to present the request parameter and potentially drop solution 7 in favor of solution 8, while finalizing the wording and details before presenting it to the main working group.

## Next Steps

- Benjie to add the "on error" request parameter proposal to the working group agenda for tomorrow's meeting.
- Benjie to consider adding the transitional null proposal (Solution 8) to the working group agenda, depending on feedback and readiness.
- Alex to sign up for presenting the request parameter agenda item at tomorrow's working group meeting.
- Jeanette to follow up with server folks at Meta regarding any use of introspection in production clients and report back to the group.
- All attendees to review Solution 8 (transitional null proposal) and provide feedback before the working group meeting.
- All attendees to consider whether to present Solution 8 as a general principle or with finalized wording at the working group meeting.

## Summary

### GraphQL Proposals and Error Handling

In the meeting, Alex led the discussion, and the team discussed various proposals for GraphQL. Jeanette presented a document detailing the potential impact of each proposal on their internal systems at Meta. Martin raised concerns about the long-term implications of Solution 5, which involves updating all clients to be error-aware. Benjie proposed a new directive, "no propagate," which would disable error propagation and allow for a more gradual adoption of error-aware clients. The team also discussed the potential impact of these changes on their existing systems and the need for a clear migration strategy. The conversation ended with a call for further review of the proposals before the next meeting.

### GraphQL Syntax and Tooling Discussion

Benjie discussed the arguments against using new syntax for a transitional feature, including the need to update tooling and the desire not to add syntax permanently to the GraphQL specification. He suggested that the syntax could be used for other purposes and that it would be preserved in the specification's history. Benjie also expressed concerns about the current solution, which he believes is a property of the type, not a field property. He proposed a different solution, which was met with pushback due to aesthetic concerns.

### GraphQL Solution Consolidation Discussion

In the meeting, Alex sought to understand why a single solution couldn't be agreed upon at the last working group meeting. Benjie suggested that the existing solutions were presented quickly, and Lee's solution, being the inventor of GraphQL, was compelling. He also noted that the people making decisions hadn't thought about all the edge cases or migration flow. Jlcheng suggested that with fewer proposals, it might be easier for people to make decisions. Benjie proposed a new solution, but was unsure if it was worth writing up. Martin and Stephen discussed consolidating solutions. Benjie mentioned another solution that wasn't written up, which was a combination of solutions 6 and 7. He expressed his preference for a solution that allows for error handling on the client and true nullability in the schema.

### Legacy Clients and Introspection Discussion

Stephen and Benjie discussed the importance of considering legacy clients in their future plans. Benjie questioned the necessity of introspection for clients, suggesting that it could be a useful tool for developers. Stephen agreed, noting that their consumer clients don't have access to introspection at runtime, but it's used at build time. Benjie asked about the use of introspection in developer tooling and legacy systems, to which Stephen responded that it would likely be used in long-tail tools and plugins. The team agreed that while it would require some effort to update, it was a tractable task.

### Strategies for Upcoming Working Group Meeting

In the meeting, the team discussed strategies for the upcoming working group meeting. They focused on presenting the request parameter and potentially dropping solution 7 in favor of solution 8. They also considered the similarities between solutions 6 and 8, and how they might impact existing tooling. The team agreed to present the transitional null appendix, but decided to finalize the wording and details before presenting it to the main working group.
