# Client Controlled Nullability WG - April 2024

**Watch the replay:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bFAyD8AiEcg&list=PLP1igyLx8foFPThkIGEUVbne2_DBwgQke)

Attendees:

- Alex Reilly
- Benjie Gillam
- Martin Bonnin
- Tom Peasgood (M&S)

Notes:

- Aim: feedback from Relay / Apollo experiments
- Martin: no updates since last time. A few partners have tried it out; they
  love it but they want better syntax. No change to `@catch` or
  `@semanticNonNull` directives yet.
- Alex: any use cases the directives don't cover?
- Martin: people have been experimenting but it's hard to sell it to the team
  because it might still change.
- Tom: Implementing Apollo server federated gateway; 5-7 subgraphs currently
  (expecting up to 30 later). M&S started encountering issues. Schema is heavily
  not-null; when one service could not talk to another it was bubbling. Ideal:
  client handles the errors. Pushing the control to the client feels quite good.
  Discovered SemanticNonNull which piqued interest.
- Alex: Are you using Apollo platforms?
- Tom: Apollo Server. Subgraphs are written in different languages (TypeScript,
  Python, Java).
- Martin: is this for service-to-service communication?
- Tom: that's where we found the issue with non-null - this many services
  talking together, communication is not always the best. Customer wants
  location from the entity, but they both have a different concept of the
  location id, and this was wiping out the entire response.
- A single service going down could cause nulls in many places, which could blow
  up whole queries.
- Alex: we've primarily been talking about frontend clients, service-to-service
  is interesting.
- Tom: this is for frontend clients, it's the service-to-service that can break
  client queries.
- Martin: there's two sides of nullability; semantic non-null prevents null
  bubbling (server side) and `@catch` is client side to control how errors are
  handled.
- Tom: SNN makes our schema safer without making the entire schema nullable.
- Alex: would you go back to the beginning and make fields nullable due to null
  bubbling happening so much?
- Tom: No, it's not that bad. It's just annoying when it happens.
- Benjie: Interesting to see how the ‘!’ discussion moved to ‘?’
- Benjie: had a long call with Lee. Both proposals are very similar. Revisit
  some of the fundamental assumptions and challenge some of those. Hopefully
  next month. Not 100% new but assembled in a new way. For non-nullable style
  schemas, they could potentially move in a non-breaking way.
- Alex: is what is blocking us the fact that none of the current proposals are
  satisfactory
- Benjie: strictNullability has better syntax but it’s harder to adopt.
  semanticNonNull is the opposite. Mixing both could be interesting.
- Martin: that would make a nice GraphQL Conf talk
- Benjie: CFP closes end of next month!
